[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: I made
a bug once and I need to confess.
I need to come clean and
share this with you.
It was in 2001.
>> Douglas Crockford: And
I was writing in Java, I wrote one of
the first JSON parsers and it was part of
a reference implementation to show people
how easy it was to write a JSON parser.
And it included this statement,
which created an index variable,
which counted characters into the string
or a stream that was being parsed.
So if there were a syntax error,
we could tell you at what character
position that error occurred.
And an int is big enough to cover
what about 2 billion characters,
which is pretty big.
That was 2 gigabytes was a big
disk drive at that time and
the way I was using chase and
they never had a message that
was bigger than a couple of K, so
I thought that's a lot of headroom.
That's being pretty generous.
I'm future proof, this is good.
So a couple years ago,
I got a bug report from somebody
who had passed a JSON text to
the parser that was several
gigabytes in size that contained
a syntax error past 2 gigabytes.
And the error message that my parser
provided was wildly wrong and
they looked at the code and
they very quickly figured out why it was
wildly wrong, and was because I said, int.
So I hate int.
Int's terrible.
Int, I think is one of the worst ideas
in the history of programming and
the reason I hate int is because
what it does on overflow.
So, let's talk philosophically.
So, what should happen if you have a value
that's too big to fit in a cell of memory?
What should happen?
There's one school of thought that says,
well, the CPU should haul it.
That's kind of old school.
You're not going get 99s that way, but
at least you're guaranteed you're
not going to create any bad results.
Death before confusion.
There's another school that says,
we'll have an interrupt.
We'll raise an exception.
We'll go to some other path,
which says something.
[SOUND] Do some about that,
give some warning and
prevent the original operation
from falling through.
That's reasonable.
Another approach would say,
we'll provide some sentinel,
some non-value and
put that in memory instead.
So when you go back and look for it, it'll
say, don't know what you're looking for,
but it's not here.
Another approach might say,
take the largest thing that does fit and
put that in there instead.
It's called saturation.
That's a reasonable thing to do in
computer graphics and signal processing,
but you don't wanna do that
in financial applications.
No, no, no.
But suppose what you want to do is
maximize the likelihood in effect of
errors, I think what you wanna do is
throw away the most significant bits and
don't tell anybody and that's what we
do and I don't think it makes sense.
So, why do we do that?
It's because it made sense in the 50s.
So in the 50s, we made computers out of
vacuum tubes and vacuum tubes are big and
they consume a lot of power and
they get hot and they burn out quickly.
So the more tubes you have in your ALU,
the more it costs to build,
the more it costs operate,
the more it costs to maintain,
the shorter the mean time to failure.
So if you can figure out a way to take
some tubes out, that's a huge win and
some genius and
I do believe he was a genius.
Figured out that if we use complement
arithmetic instead of signed magnitude,
we don't have to implement
the subtract circuit.
All we have to do is put a compliment,
which is almost free in front of the add
circuit and ignore the overflow.
That was brilliant.
That was a great idea at the time.
But since then, Moore's Law has
gone crazy with the number of
devices that are possible on a chip and we
have not reconsidered that decision that
was made in the 50s and
I think we are way, way overdue on that.
To make this even worse, memory used
to be extremely scarce and expensive.
Machine might only have
a couple of K in it.
The Atari 2600, if you remember,
only had 128 bytes of RAM.
That was all of the ram
in the entire machine.
So, you were really careful in
allocating memory to numbers.
And if you could figure out a way to get
two numbers into 1 byte, you would do it,
because you didn't have
very many of them and
our programming languages
are still in that mindset.
So for example, in Java, you've got byte,
char, short, in, long, float and
double just as the main built-in types.
So every time you create a property or
a parameter or
a variable, you have to ask,
which one of those?
You've got to pick one.
And if you get it right, then okay.
But if you get it wrong,
the program is gonna fail and
it's not gonna fail immediately necessary.
In fact, it might fail some time in
the future and tests cannot find that,
because your tests all assume
a particular data model and
they are not sufficient for
finding these sorts of errors.
Tests fail on this stuff and
there's no value in having
picked the right type,
because I saved 16 bits on this variable.
Yehey, what's the cash value of
the of the savings of that memory?
The answer is zero.
In fact,
it's nothing compared to your time.
The time you spent wasted trying to
decide which type is infinitely more
valuable than the value of
the memory that you're saving.
Now JavaScript,
on the other hand, gets it right,
because it only has one number type.
That means it's impossible to make an
error by picking the wrong number type and
that's a huge win.
I'm totally in favor of that.
The only problem is, it's the wrong
type and you know it's the wrong type,
it's because 0.1+0.2 is not equal to 0.3.
I've heard from some people who
say that doesn't matter and
they're absolutely wrong,
that matters a lot.
So, how did this happen?
How did we get to this place?
Well, again, we go back in time.
So in the 40s, when the first
Von Neumann machine start coming online,
they are integer only machines, but most
of the programmers are mathematicians and
they're trying to figure out how to
do real computation and it's hard.
They're trying to do stuff with scaled
integers and it's a lot of work, and
it's error prone, and someone who is
really smart figures out floating point
that we will have two numbers per number.
One is the number itself and
the other is a scale factor,
which tells us how many positions
to move the decimal point.
And then we can just give
it to a subroutine and
the subroutine will figure out how to
add these things, and it worked, and
it made programming much easier to do.
Unfortunately, those
libraries were really slow.
So when we get to the 50s, there is now
interest in putting floating point into
hardware, but we're making stuff
out of tubes and it's hard to do.
And some genius and
I do believe he was a genius figured out
that if we use binary floating point
instead of decimal floating point,
we don't have to implement a divide
by 10 in order to do scaling.
We can just shift one bit, which is free.
And so, they did that.
Now, that worked great for
scientific computing.
Because in scientific computing,
your lower order digits
are probably wrong, anyway.
So the fact that you can't exactly
represent the decimal digits is not all
that important, but it doesn't work for
business processing,
because they're adding up money and
they need to be exact.
They have to give the sense exact.
So there is this division,
there is scientific computing and
there is business computing and
they use different hardware.
They use different programming languages.
So when you order your mainframe, you
either get the floating point package or
you get the BCD package for
doing your COBOL processing.
And that's sort of the way the world
worked until we kind of came into
the modern age and COBOL dies off and
Java is the successor to COBOL,
but Java comes from the Fortran
school not from the COBOL school.
It doesn't do a good job of dealing with
the the business types, but that's kind of
the tragedy that we're in now.
>> Douglas Crockford: So,
I propose to fix it and
this is my solution.
I called DEC64 and
it's a 64-bit quantity containing two
numbers modeled very much after
what they were doing in the 40s.
So I've got one number,
which is a coefficient.
It's 56 bits long and
I've got another number,
which is the exponent,
which is 8 bits long and
it's really nice and
it works, because of this 10.
So, it's really easy to see
what something is going to do.
It's just this formula,
really really simple.
No complicated packing or unpacking.
I put the lower 8 bits in the bottom,
because I'm Intel architecture,
we can unpack that for free.
So a software implementation
can be very efficient and
this gets us 16 or
17 decimal places, very accurate.
We can do exact business processing.
It's not data doing scientific processing,
either.
So my proposal is that this be the only
data format in future application
languages, that we just have one
number type and it be this one.
So to prove it,
I have a software implementation available
in DEC64 assembly language,
that's on GitHub.
If you're curious about this,
you can check it out and and
it performs pretty well.
So if you're adding integers
in a software implementation,
it can add two integers in five
instructions, which is pretty good.
It's maybe four more than you'd like,
except that with those five instructions
you also get overflow protection and you
get nouns, which are nice things to have.
I think essential things to have.
In a hardware implementation, adding
integers should happen in one cycle,
which means we don't need to have ints as
separate type in order to get performance.
We can get performance and
we can get the range of values
that we need in one number type.
So, my goal is to convince everybody in
the world that this is the one number type
to use in the next system.
Now it turns out, I don't actually have
to convince everybody in the world.
I only have to convince one person,
that's the man or
the woman who designs the next language.
If I can convince that person that they
want a language with one number type that
works well with humans that does
arithmetic the way we were taught to do
arithmetic in school, so that we
won't get confused, then we'll win.